Report




McAfee Labs
Threats Report
December 2016
                                                 2016 will be
                                                 remembered
                                                as “the year of
                                                ransomware.”




About McAfee Labs                                                 Introduction
McAfee Labs is one of the world’s leading sources for threat      It has been a rather eventful fall at Intel Security!
research, threat intelligence, and cybersecurity thought
                                                                  In late August, Intel security researchers joined with global
leadership. With data from millions of sensors across key
                                                                  law enforcement agencies to take down the WildFire
threats vectors—file, web, message, and network—McAfee
                                                                  ransomware botnet. In addition to assisting with the
Labs delivers real-time threat intelligence, critical analysis,
                                                                  takedown, Intel Security developed a free tool that decrypts
and expert thinking to improve protection and reduce risks.
                                                                  files encrypted by WildFire. Learn more about the WildFire
McAfee is now part of Intel Security.                             ransomware and how to recover from it.

www.mcafee.com/us/mcafee-labs.aspx                                On September 7, it was announced that Intel Security will
                                                                  be partially spun off from Intel next spring, creating one of
                                                                  the largest independent pure-play cybersecurity companies
             Follow McAfee Labs
                                                                  in the industry. Although Intel will still own 49% of Intel
                                                                  Security, the majority will be owned by TPG, a leading
                                                                  alternative asset company. We will once again be known as
                                                                  McAfee.

                                                                  Chris Young, Intel Security’s Senior Vice President and
                                                                  General Manager since 2014, will become CEO of the new
                                                                  McAfee. Our corporate product strategy, announced at the
                                                                  FOCUS 15 Security Conference last year, will not change. We
                                                                  believe that this change will position McAfee for enhanced
                                                                  focus, innovation, and growth. Exciting times!




                                                                               McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 2
In October, we announced and published the report                        Our second Key Topic summarizes the year in
                                                                     ■


Health Warning: Cyberattacks are targeting the health care               ransomware. Not only was there a huge jump
industry. In that report, we examined health care data theft,            in the number of ransomware attacks in 2016
including what is being stolen, who is stealing it, and what             but we saw significant technical advancements,
they are doing with it. The theft of personal medical data is            too. We detail some of those advancements in
particularly alarming because it cannot simply be canceled               this story.
and replaced like payment cards. And the theft of medical                Finally, our third Key Topic digs into Trojans
                                                                     ■

research data threatens the economic model of the entire                 that infect legitimate code and hide out, hoping
pharmaceutical industry.                                                 to go unnoticed as long as possible to maximize
                                                                         payouts. We show how attackers are creating
In early November, we held our FOCUS 16 Security
                                                                         long-lasting, fully undetectable malware.
Conference in Las Vegas. Attendees were treated to
more than 90 breakout sessions, 12 targeted group                 These three Key Topics are followed by our usual set of
meetings, and dozens of TurboTalks. Ted Koppel, anchor            quarterly threat statistics.
of “Nightline” for 25 years and author of the bestseller
Lights Out, spoke during a keynote about the possibility of
                                                                  And in other news…
a cyberattack on America’s power grid and how to protect
against it. The lights stayed on for us, so we had fun with
                                                                  Zero-day malware continues to grow geometrically.
the Goo Goo Dolls on the last night.
                                                                  Traditional antivirus software relies primarily on signatures
                                                                  to detect malware, but signatures are not useful for battling
We also published our McAfee Labs 2017 Threats
                                                                  zero-day malware. To address this challenge, McAfee Labs
Predictions report last month. In that report, we offered
                                                                  has developed new proactive technologies designed to
14 threat predictions around such topics as ransomware,
                                                                  detect zero-day attacks.
hardware threats, hacktivism, and threat intelligence
sharing. We also interviewed dozens of thought leaders
                                                                         McAfee Real Protect is a machine-learning
                                                                     ■

from across Intel Security to develop long-range
                                                                         technology that incorporates statistical
predictions around cloud threats and IoT threats. What
                                                                         correlation to proactively identify malware
threats and breaches do we expect to see? How will
                                                                         without using an antivirus signature. It was first
geopolitical issues, legislation, and regulatory actions affect
                                                                         released in 2015 as free “beta” software both in
these environments? And what responses do we anticipate
                                                                         McAfee Stinger and as a standalone application.
from cloud service providers, IoT device developers, and
                                                                         This month, it will be released as a supported
security vendors? Read our report to find out.
                                                                         feature within McAfee ENS 10.5. As part of our
                                                                         flagship enterprise endpoint product, it will be
And now we enter the holiday season by publishing the
                                                                         supported and can be installed and managed
McAfee Labs Threats Report: December 2016. In this
                                                                         from the McAfee ePolicy Orchestrator platform.
quarterly threats report, we highlight three Key Topics:
                                                                         Dynamic Application Containment limits
                                                                     ■


       Intel Security commissioned a primary research                    or eliminates suspicious applications from
   ■


       study to gain a deeper understanding of the                       making changes on the endpoint. It can block
       ways in which enterprises are using security                      file or registry actions, child process creation,
       operations centers, how they have changed                         and injection into other processes. It can
       over time, and what they will look like in the                    simultaneously save the first system targeted
       future.                                                           by attackers, prevent network infection, and
                                                                         provide business continuity to the endpoint. It
                                                                         is now part of McAfee ENS.




Share this Report


                                                                                McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 3
Every quarter, we discover new things from the telemetry      We continue to receive valuable feedback from our readers
that flows into McAfee Global Threat Intelligence (McAfee     through our Threats Report user surveys. If you would like
GTI). The McAfee GTI cloud dashboard allows us to see         to share your views about this Threats Report, please click
and analyze real-world attack patterns that lead to better    here to complete a quick, five-minute survey.
customer protection. This information provides insight into
                                                              Happy holidays to you and your loved ones.
attack volumes that our customers experience. In Q3, our
customers saw the following attack volumes:
                                                              —Vincent Weafer, Vice President, McAfee Labs
       McAfee GTI received on average 44.1 billion
   ■


       queries per day in Q3.
       McAfee GTI protections against malicious URLs
   ■


       decreased to 57 million per day in Q3 from 100
       million per day in Q2.
       McAfee GTI protections against malicious files
   ■


       increased to 150 million per day in Q3 from
       104 million per day in Q2. A year ago we saw a
       decrease in this period.
       McAfee GTI protections against potentially
   ■


       unwanted programs showed a small increase
       from Q2 to Q3. However, there was a dramatic
       drop in Q3 2016 compared with Q3 2015. In
       Q3 2016, we saw 32 million per day versus 175
       million per day in Q3 2015.
       McAfee GTI protections against risky IP
   ■


       addresses showed a slight decrease, to 27
       million per day in Q3 from 29 million per day in
       Q2. This was a much smaller decrease than the
       one seen from Q2 to Q3 in 2015.




Share this Report


                                                                          McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 4
                             Contents
                             Executive Summary                                    6
McAfee Labs Threats Report
December 2016
                             Key Topics                                           8
This report was researched
                                Do you need to pull up your SOCs?                 9
and written by:
Christiaan Beek                 A year at ransom                                  24
Douglas Frosst
                                “Trojanized” legitimate software is on the rise   33
Paula Greve
Barbara Kay
                             Threats Statistics                                   41
Bart Lenaerts-Bergmans
Charles McFarland
Eric Peterson
Raj Samani
Craig Schmugar
Rick Simon
Dan Sommer
Bing Sun
                                      Executive Summary
                                      Do you need to pull up your SOCs?

                                      Intel Security commissioned a primary research study to gain a deeper
                                      understanding of the ways in which enterprises are using security operations
Intel Security surveyed security
                                      centers (SOCs), how they have changed over time, and what they will look like
practitioners to better understand
                                      in the future. We interviewed almost 400 security practitioners across several
how enterprises are using SOCs,
                                      geographies, industries, and company sizes. We learned that:
how they have changed over time,
and what they will look like in the
                                             Almost nine out of 10 organizations report that they have an internal
future. Among other things, we           ■


learned that most organizations              or external SOC.
are overwhelmed with alerts, but
                                             Most are progressing toward the goal of a proactive and optimized
                                         ■
they are making steady progress
                                             security operation, but 26% still operate in reactive mode, with ad-
toward SOCs that are proactive
                                             hoc approaches to security operations, threat hunting, and incident
and able to systematically respond
                                             response.
to confirmed attacks.
                                             64% of organizations surveyed receive some type of security
                                         ■


                                             operations assistance from managed security services providers.
                                             About two-thirds of the organizations surveyed use a security
                                         ■


                                             information and event management (SIEM) solution. About half of
                                             those without a SIEM intend to deploy the functionality within the
                                             next 12–18 months.
                                             Most organizations are overwhelmed by alerts, and 93% are unable
                                         ■


                                             to triage all relevant threats.
                                             More than 65% of organizations have formal threat-hunting
                                         ■


                                             operations.
                                             The highest priority for future growth is to improve the ability
                                         ■


                                             to respond to confirmed attacks, which includes coordination,
                                             remediation, eradication, and preventing reoccurrences.

                                      A year at ransom

                                      In last year’s McAfee Labs 2016 Threats Predictions Report, we claimed that
                                      2015’s spike in ransomware attacks would continue and that ransomware
Not a day went by in 2016 in
                                      would be a major and rapidly growing threat in 2016. As predicted, 2016 may
which ransomware did not make
                                      be remembered as “the year of ransomware,” with both a huge jump in the
security industry headlines.
                                      number of ransomware attacks and significant technical advances in this type
In this Key Topic, we highlight
2016’s many significant technical     of attack. Through the end of Q3, the number of new ransomware samples
enhancements in ransomware and        this year totals 3,860,603, an increase of 80% since the beginning of the
the progress the security industry    year. Some of 2016’s most significant technical advancements in ransomware
is making to fight back against the
                                      include partial or full disk encryption, encryption of websites used by
threat.
                                      legitimate applications, anti-sandboxing, more sophisticated exploit kits for
                                      ransomware delivery, and ransomware-as-a-service. This Key Topic discusses
                                      these advancements and also some good news, including the newly formed
                                      anti-ransomware collaboration No More Ransom! and several successful
                                      ransomware control system takedowns.




Share this Report


                                                                           McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 6
                                    “Trojanized” legitimate software is on the rise

                                    “Backdoor” access to systems has been coveted by malware authors, spies,
                                    and nation-states for decades. Tactics for finding this entrance range from
In this Key Topic, we detail
                                    persuading victims via social engineering to hand over the keys to their
some of the many ways in which
                                    devices, to intercepting hardware in the supply chain and inserting backdoors
attackers place Trojans within
                                    to surreptitiously gain remote access. However, the most common method is
commonly accepted code and
how they remain below the radar.    through the deployment of Trojan software. Trojans infect legitimate code and
We also recommend policies and      hide, hoping to go unnoticed as long as possible to maximize payouts. In this
procedures that will help protect   Key Topic, we detail some of the many ways in which attackers place Trojans
against this form of attack.
                                    within commonly accepted code and how they remain below the radar. We also
                                    recommend policies and procedures that will help protect against this form of
                                    attack.




Share this Report


                                                                    McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 7
Key Topics
                 Do you need to pull up your SOCs?
                 A year at ransom
                 “Trojanized” legitimate software is
                 on the rise




Share feedback
                                                                                                                        Key Topics




                                        Do you need to pull up your SOCs?
                                        The current state of and future plans for the security operations center
Security Operations Center (SOC)

A SOC is a facility in which
                                        —Douglas Frosst, Barbara Kay, Bart Lenaerts-Bergmans, and Rick Simon
information systems (websites,
applications, databases, data centers
                                        A few years ago, dedicated security operations centers (SOCs) seemed to be
and servers, networks, desktops,
                                        going the way of the dinosaur—the era of big rooms with big monitors and teams
and other endpoints) are monitored,
                                        of analysts seemed ready to be replaced by distributed teams, outsourced, or
assessed, and defended.
                                        disbanded entirely. If you were not in the defense department or on Wall Street,
                                        many thought, then you did not need a SOC. Then targeted attacks and insider
                                        threats moved from movie and government plots to an everyday reality for
                                        enterprises. According to an Intel Security survey, 68% of investigations in 2015
                                        involved a specific entity, either as a targeted external attack or an insider threat.


                                                                    Reason for security investigations



                                                                     Generic malware

                                                     Targeted malware-based attack

                                                      Targeted network-based attack

                                                              Malicious insider threat

                                                Accidental insider threat or data loss

                                                          Nation-state attack (direct)

                                              Nation-state attack (indirect/hacktivist)

                                                                                Other


                                                                                          0    10%       20%       30%

                                                                                                                  Source: Intel Security.




                                        Today, almost all commercial (1,000–5,000 employees) and enterprise (more than
                                        5,000 employees) organizations run some type of SOC, and half of them have
Almost all commercial and
                                        had one for more than a year, according to the latest research study from Intel
enterprise organizations run some
                                        Security. As the number of incidents continues to increase, security organizations
type of SOC. They are investing
                                        appear to be maturing and using what they learn to educate and improve
more in SOCs and many have seen
a decline in incident investigations.   prevention in a virtuous cycle. For instance, survey respondents documented
They attribute the decline to           their expanding investments in SOCs and attributed an increase in investigations
better protection and processes.        to an improved ability to detect attacks. Those who reported a decline in
                                        investigations of incidents attributed this improvement to better protection and
                                        processes, which mature organizations perform as the final stage of a security
                                        investigation.

                                        These are some of the findings in a primary research study commissioned by
                                        Intel Security on the current state of security management environments and
                                        threat detection capabilities, as well as priority areas for future growth.




Share this Report


                                                                                   McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 9
                                                                                                   Key Topics



                    Security management environment

                    Almost nine out of 10 organizations in this study reported that they have an
                    internal or external SOC, although commercial organizations are slightly less
                    likely to have one (84%) compared with enterprises (91%). Smaller organizations
                    in general are implementing SOCs a bit later than enterprises, as only 44% of
                    commercial groups have had one for more than 12 months, whereas 56% of
                    enterprise SOCs have been around for that long. Most SOCs (60%) are currently
                    run internally, with 23% operating a mix of internal and external support, and
                    17% fully external. For the few that have not established a SOC, only 2% of
                    enterprises have no plans to do so, versus 7% of commercial companies.


                                   Which of the following applies to your organization
                                      with respect to SOCs (internal or external)?

                       70%


                       60%


                       50%


                       40%


                       30%


                       20%


                       10%


                           0
                                   Established       Established     Planning to set     No plans to
                                    internal or      internal or      one up in the      set one up
                                  external more    external within   next 12 months
                                      than 12      past 12 months
                                   months ago



                                  1,000–4,999         5,000–19,999        More than 20,000
                                  employees           employees           employees

                                                                                             Source: Intel Security.



                    Variety of SOC models

                    Companies run SOCs in a variety of styles. The study used the following
                    definitions for five distinct operating models, listed here in increasing order of
                    maturity:

                           Virtual SOC: No dedicated facility, part-time team members, reactive;
                       ■


                           activated only when a critical alert or incident occurs; primary model
                           when fully delegated to a managed security services provider (MSSP).
                           Distributed/Co-managed SOC: Dedicated and semidedicated team
                       ■


                           members; typically operates during standard business hours (8 hours
                           per day/5 days per week); co-managed if used with an MSSP.
                           Multifunction SOC/NOC: Dedicated facility with a dedicated team
                       ■


                           performing not just security, but other critical IT operations 24/7
                           from the same facility to reduce costs.
Share this Report


                                                        McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 10
                                                                                                                      Key Topics



                                              Dedicated SOC: Fully in-house, 24/7 operations with dedicated
                                          ■


                                              facility and a dedicated team.
                                              Command SOC: Coordinates other SOCs, provides threat
                                          ■


                                              intelligence, situational awareness and additional expertise; typically
                                              not involved in day-to-day operations.

                                       Of the 88% of organizations operating a SOC, the majority (56%) reported that
                                       they use a multifunction model combining SOC and network operations center
About half of organizations that
                                       (NOC) functionality. Organizations in the United Kingdom (64%) and Germany
have a SOC combine SOC and
                                       (63%) are even more likely to operate in this model. Dedicated SOCs are in use
NOC functionality. 15% have
                                       by 15% of companies and are more prevalent in the United States (21%). Virtual
dedicated SOCs and 15% have
virtual SOCs.                          SOCs are the third model, also used by about 15% of respondents, followed
                                       by a distributed or co-managed SOC, at 11%. Only 2% reported operating a
                                       command SOC.


                                                  Which one of the following five types of SOC models comes
                                                        closest to describing your organization’s SOC?

                                          70%


                                          60%


                                          50%


                                          40%


                                          30%


                                          20%


                                          10%


                                              0
                                                      Virtual        Distributed/   Multifunction   Dedicated   Command
                                                       SOC           co-managed      SOC/NOC          SOC         SOC
                                                                         SOC


                                                     United States           United Kingdom         Germany      Canada

                                                                                                                Source: Intel Security.




                                       This distribution of SOC implementations has several implications. The majority
                                       operate at or past the midpoint of SOC maturity, progressing toward the goal of a
More than a quarter of surveyed
                                       proactive and optimized security operation. However, more than a quarter (26%)
businesses still operate in reactive
                                       still operate in reactive mode, with ad-hoc approaches to security operations,
mode, with ad-hoc approaches to
                                       threat hunting, and incident response. This can significantly extend detection
security operations, threat hunting,
and incident response.                 and response times, leaving the business at greater risk of significant damage, as
                                       well as facing a higher cleanup cost.




Share this Report


                                                                               McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 11
                                                                                     Key Topics



Increase in detected incidents

Whether from an increase in attacks or better monitoring capabilities, most
companies (67%) reported an increase in security incidents, with 51% saying
they have increased a little, and 16% that they have increased a lot. This is
analogous to findings from the key topic “Information theft: the who, how, and
prevention of data leakage” in the McAfee Labs Threats Report: September 2016.
That primary research study found that organizations which watched data more
closely for leakage reported more data-loss incidents.


        Would you say that the number of security incidents your
      organization has encountered has increased or decreased over
                           the last 12 months?

      60%


      50%


      40%


      30%


      20%


      10%


       0%
               Increased         Increased       Remained         Decreased        Decreased
                  a lot            a little        stable           a little         a lot


                                                                          More attacks
            Why do you feel that the          Stable
            number of incidents has
                                                                          More attacks and
            increased or decreased?           Better monitoring
                                                                          better monitoring

                                                                          Better prevention
                                              Fewer attacks

                                                                               Source: Intel Security.




                                       McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 12
                                                                                                                 Key Topics



                                                              Occurrence of security incidents

                                       Reasons for security                                          Reasons for security
                                        incident increase                                             incident decrease

                                                                                                    22% We are not being
                                                                                                      attacked as often
                                               57%
                                           We are being
                                          attacked more                       67%
                                                                           Increased
                                                                                                            96%
                                                                                                       We have better
                                                                                                        prevention
                                               73%
                                                                                                       and processes
                                           We are able
                                                                                                          in place
                                              to spot                        25%
                                          attacks better                Remained stable



                                                                              7%
                                                                           Decreased

                                                                                                           Source: Intel Security.




                                      Only 7% overall indicate that incidents have decreased, and the remaining 25%
                                      say that they have remained stable over the past year. There was little variance
                                      reported by country, but incidents increased as organizations get smaller,
                                      possibly indicating that criminals have broadened their attack targets. Only 45%
                                      of the largest organizations (more than 20,000 employees) reported an increase,
                                      compared with 73% of the smallest (fewer than 5,000 employees).

                                      The small group that reported a decrease in incidents overwhelmingly (96%)
                                      believe that this was due to better prevention and processes. Of those who said
                                      that incidents increased, the majority feel that it was due to a combination of
                                      improved detection capabilities (73%) and more attacks (57%).


                                      Managed security services

                                      Most organizations receive some type of security operations assistance from
                                      managed security services providers, with 64% of those surveyed using MSSPs
About two-thirds of organizations
                                      to augment their internal capabilities. Of the 26% that do not use external
surveyed receive some type of
                                      services, Canadian organizations are the least likely to use one, at 40%. The
security operations assistance
                                      largest organizations are also more likely to go it alone, at 38%. For those that
from managed security services
providers. Choosing internal or       use MSSPs, the median work with two service providers. German organizations
external resources for security       are more likely to use three, and Canadian organizations only one.
operations is most likely
dependent on the availability
of internal personnel, external
services, and the comparative skill
levels.




Share this Report


                                                                       McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 13
                                                                                         Key Topics




                                                                        Respondents choosing
                    Reasons for an increase in MSSP use                 this as the primary
                                                                        reason

                    Improve investigations and scoping of                         14%
                    potential incidents

                    Security monitoring and monitoring coverage                   21%

                    Improve advanced threat detection                             18%

                    Help with SOC, incident response and hunter                   18%
                    staffing, and skills shortages

                    Access to technology such as big data                         12%
                    platforms, analytics, and threat intelligence

                    Dedicated incident response                                   8%

                    Compliance                                                    4%

                    Reduce costs                                                  3%

                    Device management                                             3%




                                                                        Respondents choosing
                    Reasons for a decrease in MSSP use                  this as the primary
                                                                        reason

                    Improve incident response                                     20%

                    Improve the quality of investigations                         13%

                    Improve the speed of investigations                           15%

                    Reduce costs                                                  20%

                    Improve security monitoring                                   23%

                    Improve compliance                                            3%

                    Access data and intelligence that is difficult to             8%
                    obtain from MSSPs




Share this Report


                                                     McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 14
                                                                                                                 Key Topics



                                       For the next 12 to 18 months, most organizations (71%) expect their MSSP
                                       use to remain the same, while 19% expect it to increase and 10% expect
                                       it to decrease. Those that expect MSSP use to decrease are bringing more
                                       security operations in house to improve incident response and the quality of
                                       investigations. Those that expect it to increase are looking to external partners to
                                       improve investigations and scoping of potential incidents, and broaden security
                                       monitoring and monitoring coverage. Basically, choosing internal or external
                                       resources for security operations is most likely dependent on the availability
                                       of internal personnel, external services, and the comparative skill levels. As a
                                       result, there is some variance by country, with German organizations primarily
                                       interested in improving advanced threat detection with MSSPs, and UK outfits
                                       looking for help with technology such as big data platforms, analytics, and threat
                                       intelligence.


                                       Security information and event management

                                       The ability to quickly identify, investigate, and resolve threats is probably
                                       the most important aspect of today’s security operations. Preventing 100%
                                       of attacks may never be achievable, but security information and event
                                       management (SIEM) often provides a real-time understanding of the world
                                       outside—threat data, reputation feeds, and vulnerability status—as well as a
                                       view of the systems, users, data, risks, and activities inside, obtained through
                                       continuous monitoring and correlation. Actionable intelligence and situational
                                       awareness delivered by a SIEM may help orchestrate security operations and,
                                       when an incident is detected, may enable better collaboration for faster incident
                                       response.

                                       Almost 70% of these organizations report using a SIEM solution today. Those
                                       organizations using external security services are highly likely (93%) to have
                                       those services involved with the SIEM in some fashion, most of them (71%)
                                       asking the MSSP to run day-to-day SIEM operations. Almost half (45%) of
                                       companies without a SIEM intend to deploy the functionality within the next 12
                                       to 18 months.


                                       Threat detection capabilities

                                       Increasing visibility and reducing detection and incident response times are key
                                       focus areas for most organizations, as they work to increase the maturity level of
The most common threat
                                       their security operations. Tried and true security methods continue to work, and
detection signals for about
                                       are still the primary source of information. The most common threat detection
two-thirds of organizations
                                       signals for a majority of organizations (64%) come from traditional security
surveyed come from traditional
security control points, such as       control points, such as antimalware, firewall, and intrusion prevention systems.
antimalware, firewall, and intrusion   Just under half (46%) also rely on indicators of compromise to search for a
prevention systems. Just under         breach, or using network analytics (40%). A few (26%) have begun using a SIEM
half also rely on indicators of
                                       to correlate events and identify potential incidents, and 23% are actively hunting
compromise or network analytics.
                                       attacks.




Share this Report


                                                                         McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 15
                                                                                                                     Key Topics



                                               How likely do these various detection approaches trigger
                                                      a threat investigation in your organization?

                                         40%


                                         35%


                                         30%


                                         25%


                                         20%


                                         15%


                                         10%


                                          5%


                                          0%
                                                   Security    Indicators of   Analytics   SIEM, e.g., via   Hypothesis-
                                                   control     compromise                   correlation      driven threat
                                                    point                                      rules            hunting

                                                                                                               Source: Intel Security.




                                     Alert volume and investigations

                                     Most organizations are overwhelmed by alerts, and 93% are unable to triage all
                                     relevant threats. On average, organizations are unable to sufficiently investigate
Most organizations are
                                     25% of their alerts, with no significant variation by country or company size.
overwhelmed by alerts, and 93%
                                     Almost one quarter (22%) feel that they were lucky to escape with no business
are unable to triage all relevant
                                     impact as a result of not investigating these alerts. The majority (53%) reported
threats. On average, organizations
are unable to sufficiently           only minor impact, but 25% say they have suffered moderate or severe business
investigate 25% of their alerts.     impact as a result of uninvestigated alerts. The largest organizations, perhaps
Almost one-quarter feel that they    because of their better monitoring capabilities and stable incident levels, are
were lucky to escape with no
                                     more likely to report no business impact (33%).
business impact as a result of not
investigating these alerts.




Share this Report


                                                                        McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 16
                                                                                                                                Key Topics



                                               In your organization, approximately what proportion of relevant
                                                           security or threat alerts are not triaged?

                                             35%


                                             30%


                                             25%




                    Percent of respondents
                                             20%


                                             15%


                                             10%


                                             5%


                                             0%
                                                    0%    1 to    11 to   21 to   31 to   41 to   51 to   61 to   71 to     81 to     91 to
                                                          10%     20%     30%     40%     50%     60%     70%     80%       90%       100%

                                                                              Percent of alerts not triaged

                                                                                                                          Source: Intel Security.




                                                   Estimate the impact of these potentially relevant security
                                                         alerts that are not triaged on your business

                                             60%


                                             50%


                                             40%


                                             30%


                                             20%


                                             10%


                                              0%
                                                      No impact           Minor impact       Moderate impact        Severe impact



                                                                                                                          Source: Intel Security.




                    Sources of threat information

                    The majority of organizations (55%) reported that firewall logs are the primary
                    source used for advanced threat detection and investigation, followed by
                    endpoint logs (34%) and system logs (32%). Other data, such as logs from VPN
                    activity, web proxies, DNS, and DHCP servers are used by 20% or less. Historical
                    data, important for forensic investigations or historical correlation, is typically
                    retained for between 45 and 60 days. Firewall logs, endpoint threat detection
                    logs, and Active Directory logs are retained for the longest period.


Share this Report


                                                                             McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 17
                                                                                                                          Key Topics



                                What are the top 3 data sources used by your organization
                                               to detect advanced threats?



                                   Firewall logs

                    Endpoint threat detection

                                   System logs

                                        VPN logs

                                Web proxy logs

                                        DNS logs

                               Endpoint traces

                                   Netflow logs

                           Active directory logs

                       Deception technology


                                                   0         10%             20%             30%              40%             50%

                                                                                                                    Source: Intel Security.


                    Staffing the SOC

                    Security professionals in this study were asked about four types of security
                    teams:

                           Tier 1 SOC analysts or equivalent. Triages, creates cases, prioritizes,
                       ■


                           and escalates.
                           Tier 2 SOC analysts or equivalent. Investigates case scope and
                       ■


                           impact, can declare an incident.
                           Hunter or equivalent. Proactively hunts for threats and can declare an
                       ■


                           incident.
                           Incident responder or equivalent. Seeks to close threat incidents
                       ■


                           created by the SOC or hunter.


                                                       Security functions in the SOC



                                           Escalates


                      Tier 1 analyst                     Tier 2 analyst                                                 Hunter
                     triages, creates                  investigates scope                                             Proactively
                          cases                            and impact                                                   hunts


                                                                Declares incident                        Declares incident



                                                                                  Incident responder
                                                                                 remediates and closes

Share this Report                                            Source: Threat Management Platform Study, Intel Security research, July 2016.



                                                                McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 18
                                                                                                                   Key Topics



                                    On average three of these teams are involved with investigating a case, scoping
                                    it and making a security decision, and responding to or remediating an incident.
Median internal staffing levels
                                    Median internal staffing levels are 10 to 15 people for each team of Tier 1 SOC
are 10 to 15 people for each
                                    analysts, Tier 2 SOC analysts, hunters, and incident responders, but only 15% of
team of Tier 1 SOC analysts, Tier
                                    organizations currently operate all four types of teams. MSSPs are often asked
2 SOC analysts, hunters, and
incident responders. Only 15% of    to augment a team’s skills and capacities, and contribute roughly one-third of
organizations currently operate     total resources for each team. There is no significant variation in the percentage
all four types of teams.            of external resources used by country or organization size. However, it is not
                                    surprising that larger organizations have larger teams. Although the median
                                    staffing level for Tier 1 teams is 15 people regardless of company size, Tier 2,
                                    hunter, and incident responder teams are about 50% larger in enterprises than in
                                    commercial organizations.

                                    More than 65% of organizations with SOCs have formal threat-hunting
                                    operations, especially in large enterprise organizations, in which it was reported
                                    by almost 75% of those surveyed. Commercial organizations tend more toward
                                    an ad-hoc approach, with 41% of them using this less formal method. Only 5%
                                    of organizations report no active threat hunting. Formal threat hunting shows
                                    a strong relationship with SOC models and maturity levels. A bit more than
                                    60% of organizations running virtual, co-managed, or multifunction SOCs have
                                    formal threat hunting, compared with more than 70% of those with dedicated or
                                    command SOCs.


                                    Areas for growth

                                    Security operations appear to be maturing, with sophisticated tools and well-
                                    staffed teams augmented by external resources. However, they are not keeping
                                    up with the volume of alerts and incidents, putting them at significant risk of a
                                    moderate or severe breach. What are their plans for enhancing their capabilities?

                                    Most of these organizations consider themselves to be similar to their peers
                                    in information security investments and speed of adoption of new security
                                    capabilities. However, around 30% think that they are above average in
                                    investment or technology adoption, and only about 10% think they are below
                                    average.

                                    The priority areas for future growth and investment are, in order:
The highest priority for future
                                           Improve the ability to respond to confirmed attacks, including
                                       ■
growth and investment is to
                                           coordination, remediation, eradication, and preventing reoccurrence.
improve the ability to respond
to confirmed attacks, including            Improve the ability to detect signals of potential attacks, including
                                       ■

coordination, remediation,                 focusing on relevant events and alerts, triage, and prioritization.
eradication, and preventing
                                           Improve the ability to investigate potential attacks, including scoping
reoccurrence. Methods to address
                                       ■


                                           the full extent and impact of an attack.
this goal includes the three
pillars of people, processes, and
technology.




Share this Report


                                                                        McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 19
                                                                                       Key Topics



Methods to address these goals include the three pillars of people, processes,
and technology. Of the organizations that do not yet have all four types of
security teams operating, 40% plan to deploy internal people into those roles
within 12 to 18 months. Similarly, around 40% of organizations plan to increase
their use of MSSP people within one or more of these security functions in
that period. Deploying new security technology is another way to enhance
capabilities, with more than 60% of organizations planning to invest in tools
for these teams. Given the significant percentage of organizations that are not
managing to triage and investigate all of their alerts, it is not surprising that key
processes are the top two focus areas for new tools: improving the speed and
accuracy of initial triage and prioritization of security alerts, and reducing the
time and effort it takes to conduct incident investigations.

Security analytics is of growing interest to help address the volume of alerts,
and is already in use by 67% of these organizations. Detection is reported as the
number one purpose today for analytics, but prioritization and risk assessment
are likely to be the top two drivers for future adoption of security analytics
during the next 12 to 18 months.


          What are the drivers of your company′s adoption of security
                analytics solutions in the next 12–18 months?

    40%


    35%


    30%


    25%


    20%


    15%


    10%


     5%


     0%
            Prioritization     Assessing        Scope      Triage   Prevention   Detection
                             risk of attack

                                                                                 Source: Intel Security.




Policies and procedures

Advancing the maturity level of a SOC involves three design principles. First,
objectively evaluate the current level of organization maturity. What are the
team’s strengths and weaknesses, where are the gaps, and what is the risk
posture? As part of this, identify the metrics necessary for ongoing evaluation,
and the data necessary to calculate them.




                                              McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 20
                                                                                                            Key Topics



                                  Next, shift the emphasis to time to detection, containment, and remediation.
                                  These times are the most effective way to focus attention and resources
                                  where they are most needed. Reducing these security times usually requires a
                                  combination of integration, automation, and improving workflows. Anywhere
                                  that the number of process steps can be reduced, human interaction eliminated,
                                  or duplication removed should be priorities.

                                  Finally, automate as many tasks as possible to augment limited human
                                  resources, improve accuracy by reducing human error, and broaden coverage of
                                  repeatable actions. Begin the automation process with low-risk tasks, and work
To learn how Intel Security can
                                  up as confidence increases. It is important to first optimize processes and then
help you optimize your security
                                  automate to get the best results.
operations, click here.


                                  Conclusion

                                  SOCs are back and continuing to expand
                                  SOCs have returned from movie land and become critical components of an
                                  organization’s security posture. Data breaches are on the rise, whether from
                                  increased attacks or better detection, and SOCs can help security teams triage
                                  alerts, respond to incidents, coordinate investigations, and proactively hunt for
                                  threats. There is no perfect SOC model. Whether the SOC is internal or external,
                                  dedicated or multifunction, the important thing is to continue improving security
                                  operations, from reactive to proactive and optimized.

                                  Upgraded tools and capabilities still needed
                                  Although SOCs have become more common, most organizations are still
                                  overwhelmed with alerts and are unable to properly investigate one out of
                                  four, resulting in minor or moderate business impacts. As a result, most feel
                                  it is important to continue making improvements to their internal security
                                  capabilities, continue or increase their use of MSSPs, and invest in additional or
                                  enhanced tools.

                                  Three major investment priorities
                                  During the next 12 to 18 months, organizations plan to invest in three major
                                  areas to improve their capabilities: responsiveness, detection, and investigation.
                                  Methods of improvement vary by country, organization size, and other attributes.
                                  These appear to be dependent on the availability of local resources, whether
                                  skilled security personnel, new and enhanced tools, or capable MSSPs.

                                  To learn how Intel Security can help you optimize your security operations, click
                                  here.

                                  For more security operations reports and resources, click here.


                                  Methodology

                                  Intel Security surveyed a panel of 390 IT security decision makers from Canada,
                                  Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Respondents covered a
                                  variety of organization sizes, industries, job titles, and employment tenure.




Share this Report


                                                                    McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 21
                                                                                                 Key Topics



                                          In which country do you work?




                                          12%

                                                                                  United States
                                                          33%
                                                                                  United Kingdom
                              27%
                                                                                  Germany

                                                                                  Canada

                                                  28%




                                                                                           Source: Intel Security.




                                    Which best describes your industry?

                    18%


                    16%


                    14%


                    12%


                    10%


                    8%


                    6%


                    4%


                    2%


                    0%
                          Manufacturing     Information    Banking   Telecommunications     Retail
                                            technology
                                              products

                                                                                           Source: Intel Security.




Share this Report


                                                    McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 22
                                                                                        Key Topics



                             What is the total number of full-time employees?




                                   10%
                                                                     1,000–2,500 employees
                          7%                 24%
                                                                     2,501–4,999 employees

                       10%                                           5,000–10,000 employees

                                                                     10,001–19,999 employees

                                                                     20,000–50,000 employees
                                              25%
                              24%

                                                                     More than 50,000 employees




                    51%                              49%
                    Enterprise >5,000                Commercial 1,000–5,000
                    employees                        employees

                                                                                  Source: Intel Security.




Share this Report


                                              McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 23
                                                                                                             Key Topics




                                    A year at ransom
                                    —Christiaan Beek, Raj Samani, and Douglas Frosst

                                    In the McAfee Labs 2016 Threats Predictions report, published last autumn,
                                    we claimed that 2015’s spike in ransomware attacks would continue and that
                                    ransomware would be a major and rapidly growing threat in 2016. As predicted,
                                    2016 may be remembered as “the year of ransomware,” with both a huge jump
                                    in the number of ransomware attacks and significant technical advances in this
                                    type of attack.


                                    A brief history of ransomware

                                    Ransomware dates to 1989, when 20,000 infected floppy disks were distributed
                                    at the World Health Organization’s AIDS conference. Using symmetric encryption,
                                    this attack was quickly broken. The first asymmetric encryption implemented
                                    in a cryptovirus attack was published in Adam Young’s 1995 master’s thesis:
                                    “Cryptovirology and the Dark Side of Black Box Cryptography.” The size of the
                                    virus was a little less than 7KB. It was not until the mid-2000s that asymmetric
                                    encryption, which is much more difficult to decipher, was used in a ransomware
                                    attack.

                                    At the time, one of the big challenges for attackers was how to get paid without
                                    getting caught. They experimented with a variety of methods. The emergence of
The emergence of Bitcoin enabled
                                    Bitcoin and similar digital currencies in 2009 enabled anonymous transactions
anonymous transactions and
                                    and provided an important foundation for future growth in ransomware attacks.
provided an important foundation
                                    CryptoLocker established the modern ransomware era in 2013, incorporating
for future growth in ransomware
attacks. CryptoLocker established   delivery via compromised websites, email attachments, control servers and with
the modern ransomware era in        Tor networks as an additional form of obfuscation. Other variants and copycats
2013. Ransomware-as-a-service       soon followed, including CryptoWall and CTB-Locker. Ransomware-as-a-service
was introduced in 2015, making
                                    was introduced in 2015, making this type of attack available to almost anyone
this type of attack available to
                                    with a computer, with the developers getting a commission on every successful
almost anyone with a computer.
                                    campaign. Later that year we also saw an increase in the threat of exposure of
                                    sensitive files and trashing the operating system, in addition to encrypting the
                                    victim’s data.

                                                                   New ransomware

                                      1,400,000


                                      1,200,000


                                      1,000,000


                                       800,000


                                       600,000


                                       400,000


                                       200,000


                                             0
                                                   Q4      Q1      Q2          Q3    Q4       Q1       Q2         Q3
                                                  2014                  2015                          2016

Share this Report                                                                                      Source: McAfee Labs.



                                                                     McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 24
                                                                                                                     Key Topics



                                                                      Total ransomware

                                  9,000,000

The count of total ransomware
                                  8,000,000
grew by 18% this quarter.

                                  7,000,000


                                  6,000,000


                                  5,000,000


                                  4,000,000


                                  3,000,000


                                  2,000,000


                                  1,000,000


                                          0
                                                Q4         Q1         Q2          Q3       Q4         Q1       Q2          Q3
                                               2014                        2015                               2016

                                                                                                                Source: McAfee Labs.




                                2016 ransomware timeline

                                This year, ransomware found a new and vulnerable target: hospitals. Although
                                there was some criticism from the hacker community about these attacks,
                                many of the victims paid, fueling further incidents. There was no real technical
                                evolution in these attacks, just phishing emails targeting people using essential
                                systems. However, the rest of the year saw considerable technical advances,
                                including partial and full disk encryption, variable and increasing ransom
                                demands, and new ransomware delivery mechanisms.


                                 Partial disk (MBR)              New anti-VM trick                     Full disk encryption
                                    encryption                   Calculate the time                    Mamba ransomware
                                 Petya ransomware                  to perform two
                                                                                                                   Ransomware-
                                                                 Windows API calls
                                                                                        Targeting                  as-a-service:
                                                                 Locky ransomware
                                                                                       businesses                     bridges


                                  March          April          May          June              July    August        September



                                Encrypting                             "Goodbye" to Angler
                                 Magento                 Double Pay    Exploit Kit: Neutrino                 Filenames key to
                                store files               victims          takes over                         amount to pay
                                KimcilWare                                                                 Phantom ransomware

                                                                                                                Source: McAfee Labs.




Share this Report


                                                                       McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 25
                                                                                                                   Key Topics



                                         Partial disk encryption

                                         In March we saw the appearance of Petya and partial disk encryption instead of
                                         file encryption. This ransomware is often delivered via a fake job-applicant email
In March we saw the appearance
                                         with a Dropbox link, and begins the attack by overwriting the master boot record,
partial disk encryption instead
                                         rebooting, and executing the malware, putting up a fake CHKDSK screen that
of file encryption. This type of
                                         encrypts the master file table. While the files are still on the disk and unaffected,
ransomware encrypts the master
file table, making files inaccessible.   the encrypted file table prevents them from being located. Paying the ransom
                                         gets the decryption key, which unlocks the file table and boot record, and
                                         removes the malware boot loader.


                                         Increasing ransom demands

                                         Petya also brought on increasing ransom demands, doubling the amount if
                                         payment was not made within seven days. One ransomware variant threatened
                                         to delete one file per hour until the ransom was paid. Another encoded a series
                                         of ransom amounts, which it chose based on the name of the distribution file,
                                         making it quick and easy to make the demand fit the victim’s ability to pay. In
                                         another case, a hospital that paid the first ransom demand was then told to pay
                                         again if it wanted to regain access to all of the files. The hospital ignored the
                                         second demand, but it remains an ongoing concern that attackers will not be
                                         “honorable” in their actions and refuse to release encryption keys even after
                                         receiving payment.


                                         Encrypting websites

                                         In March, the ransomware family KimcilWare appeared. The ransomware does
                                         not attack the victims’ machines but instead targets websites that use Magento
                                         ecommerce store files. By encrypting the files with a Rijndael (AES) block cipher
                                         and appending the extension .kimcilware at the end of each file, the store’s files
                                         become useless. The attacker can be contacted on a Hotmail account and after
                                         paying US$140 in Bitcoins, the attacker hands over a decryption key to the
                                         victim.




Share this Report


                                                                           McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 26
                                                                                                                         Key Topics



                                KimcilWare’s possible author is also associated with another piece of
                                ransomware that is based on the proof-of-concept ransomware code Hidden
                                Tear. In 2016, we have seen many ransomware samples based on this proof of
                                concept code. The following image illustrates the correlation between different
                                ransomware families associated with this code:



                                                              WildFire                      JobCrypter
                                                              Locker

                                                                           Kryptolocker


                                                    Fakben                                           Rektlocker
                                 AlphaLocker                                                                            MireWare
                                                                  PokemonGo        Ghostcrypt
                                                                  Ransomware


                                                     Korean                                          Flyper
                                                   Ransomware
                                     8Lock8                                                                          Hi Buddy




                                                                                                           Black
                                                                           Hidden Tear
                                                Sanction
                                                                                                          Feather
                                                                              Code




                                     Strictor                                                                       KimcilWare
                                                                                                     Linux
                                                     Blocatto
                                                                                                    Encoder



                                                                    Cryptear             EDA2
                                   Ryzerlo                                                                            Alphalocker
                                                   Educrypt                                         KratosCrypt


                                                                               Dev
                                                                            Nightmare

                                                              Flyper                        Feline tear



                                                                                                                    Source: McAfee Labs.



                                Anti-sandbox techniques

                                Suspicious files are often sent to a “sandbox” for evaluation before being
                                allowed to run on a user’s system. This year, ransomware attackers learned
The common “sandbox” method
                                how to differentiate between a sandbox, which is usually a virtual machine,
used to detect ransomware can
                                and a live human’s device. In a recent case, Locky, the culprit in many of
now be detected and evaded by
                                the hospital ransomware attacks, used encrypted code and execution time
some ransomware.
                                differences between real and virtual machines to evade detection. Two API
                                calls, GetProcessHeap() and CloseHandle(), one of which should be about 10
                                times faster on a real system, are run by the malware, which goes dormant if the
                                execution time difference is not as large as expected.

                                At the same time, the command-line argument “123” is used to execute the
                                ransomware. Sandboxes in general execute the malware without any arguments.
                                By not having the right argument, the ransomware will terminate and cannot be
                                fully analyzed by the sandbox technology.
Share this Report


                                                                         McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 27
                                                                                 Key Topics



Another new anti-sandbox technique looks at Microsoft Office’s recent files
collection. If the number of files in this list is very small, it assumes that it is in a
virtual machine and shuts down. Or the ownership of the IP address is checked
against a list of known security vendors and cloud security providers.


Goodbye Angler, hello Neutrino

In 2015 and the first half of 2016, the Angler exploit kit was the most popular
mechanism for delivering ransomware to potential victims. These exploit kits
are popular and have a strong support system. However, in April and May,
the volume of Angler traffic dropped dramatically, eventually shutting down
completely. It appeared to have been replaced in popularity by Neutrino,
although at nowhere near Angler’s volume of traffic. Another shift in exploit
kits happened in September, with RIG rising to challenge Neutrino for top spot.
Whatever is driving these changes in the ransomware delivery marketplace,
expect continued variations as attackers look for new ways to evade defenses.

We track the use of exploit kits in different campaigns and the vulnerabilities
they exploit. By knowing which exploits are used, we inform our customers which
patches they should prioritize to assist them in reducing their vulnerability to
these attacks. Correlating our research with third-party data sources results in
the following example:




                                                                            Source: McAfee Labs.




                                     McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 28
                                                                                                            Key Topics



                                   In the preceding picture, the red dots represent campaigns to which we can
                                   attribute the use of the Neutrino exploit kit. A few examples of these ransomware
                                   campaigns:

                                          Locky
                                      ■




                                          Cerber
                                      ■




                                          CryptXXX
                                      ■




                                          PizzaCrypts
                                      ■




                                          Zepto
                                      ■




                                   Targeting businesses

                                   Generally speaking, ransomware attacks began in the 1990s as seemingly
                                   random campaigns, with broad delivery mechanisms used to catch the
There has been a significant
                                   occasional consumer. In the past year, we have seen a significant shift to business
shift by ransomware attackers
                                   targets, as a few successful campaigns have encouraged more attacks. Typical
to business targets, as a few
                                   targets include essential services such as hospitals, but also small and medium-
successful campaigns have
encouraged more attacks.           sized businesses, which often lack a fully staffed cybersecurity operation. The
                                   initial attack vector for many of these campaigns is targeted phishing emails
                                   aimed at a specific individual or job function. In addition to encrypting files,
                                   the malware captures user credentials to steal data or spread the infection
                                   throughout the organization.


                                   Full disk encryption

                                   While Petya encrypts the boot record and file table, the Mamba ransomware
                                   encrypts complete disk partitions. The code responsible for the full disk
New ransomware variants encrypt
                                   encryption is not homemade but borrowed from the tool DiskCryptor. Not only
complete disk partitions.
                                   does this encryption make a partition’s files inaccessible, it also prevents the
                                   operating system from booting, requiring victims to use another machine to
                                   contact the attacker for payment and recovery instructions. Mamba also adapted
                                   the previously described anti–virtual machine technique, using a password as a
                                   command-line argument to execute the malware.


                                   Ransomware-as-a-service

                                   When cybercriminals do not have technical skills, infrastructure, or time, they can
                                   now participate and set up their own ransomware campaigns and extort money
“Ransomware-as-a-service” has
                                   from victims within hours. This is the aim of “ransomware-as-a-service.” The
emerged: Attackers buy access
                                   infrastructure is set up by a criminal service provider. Attackers buy access to it
to a ransomware service and pay
                                   and pay a percentage of their campaigns’ revenue to the service provider.
a percentage of their campaigns’
revenue to the service provider.




Share this Report


                                                                    McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 29
                                                                                             Key Topics



                                               Ransomware-as-a-service




                                      RaaS operator                        Cash management




                                                       Botnet affiliate/
                                                       service provider



                    Ransomware-as-a-service providers recently introduced the concept of bridges,
                    which are PHP scripts that connect attackers with their victims. The script uses
                    itself as a database and stores client keys, operating systems, IP addresses,
                    and ransom amounts, verifies the status of payments and delivers victims’
                    information to the main servers. Bridges are password protected and avoid
                    detection by search engines.




Share this Report


                                                      McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 30
                                                                                                              Key Topics



                                    Not all bad news

                                    This year has not been solely one of victories for cybercriminals; there were some
                                    notable advances on the defensive front as well, including several takedowns,
This summer, a group of security
                                    keys recovered, and the advent of an anti-ransomware alliance.
vendors and law enforcement
organizations, led by Europol
and including Intel Security,       No More Ransom!
announced the “No More              In July, a group of security vendors and law enforcement organizations, led by
Ransom!” collaboration to fight
                                    Europol and including Intel Security, announced their collaboration to fight
ransomware. This effort includes
                                    ransomware. This effort includes prevention advice, investigation assistance,
prevention advice, investigation
                                    and decryption tools. The No More Ransom! website provides a wealth of
assistance, and decryption tools.
                                    information on ransomware, including direct links to tools for decrypting files
                                    using recovered keys.

                                    On the No More Ransom! site, decryption tools are available for Chimera,
                                    Coinvault, Marsjoke, Rakhni, Rannoh, Shade, Teslacrypt, and WildFire
                                    ransomware. New tools are developed and made available at No More Ransom!
                                    as ransomware is reverse engineered or encryption keys recovered during
                                    takedowns of ransomware control servers.

                                    Originally a collaboration of four organizations, this initiative has since added 13
                                    new law enforcement partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Colombia,
                                    France, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, and
                                    the United Kingdom. No More Ransom! has allowed ransomware victims to avoid
                                    paying an estimated US$1.48 million (€1.35 million) in ransom payments to
                                    cybercriminals. The No More Ransom! portal has received more than 24.5 million
                                    visitors since its launch, for an average of 400,000 visitors per day.

                                    Takedowns
                                    There have been several takedowns of ransomware systems this year, with more
                                    in process. Two major ones efforts this year were Shade in July and WildFire in
                                    September. Law enforcement and security vendors continue to collaborate on
                                    these threats, sharing threat intelligence, research, and recovery efforts.


                                    Policies and procedures

                                    The most important step to protect systems from ransomware is to be aware of
                                    the problem and the ways in which it spreads. Here are a number of policies and
                                    procedures businesses should follow to minimize the success of ransomware
                                    attacks:

                                           Have a plan of action in the event of an attack. Know where critical
                                       ■


                                           data is located and understand if there is a method to infiltrate it.
                                           Perform business continuity and disaster recovery drills with the
                                           emergency management team to validate recovery point and time
                                           objectives. These exercises can uncover hidden impacts to business
                                           operations that do not otherwise surface during normal backup
                                           testing.
                                           Keep system patches up to date. Many vulnerabilities commonly
                                       ■


                                           abused by ransomware can be patched. Keep up to date with patches
                                           to operating systems, Java, Adobe Reader, Flash, and applications.
                                           Have a patching procedure in place and verify if the patches have
                                           been applied successfully.



Share this Report


                                                                       McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 31
                                                                                                                 Key Topics



                                           For legacy systems and devices that cannot be patched, mitigate the
                                       ■


                                           risk by leveraging application whitelisting, which locks systems and
                                           prevents unapproved program execution. Segment these systems
                                           and devices from other parts of the network using a firewall or
                                           intrusion prevention system. Disable unnecessary services or ports
                                           on these systems to reduce exposure to possible entry points of
                                           infection.
                                           Protect endpoints. Use endpoint protection and its advanced
                                       ■


                                           features. In many cases, the client is installed with only default
To learn how Intel Security
                                           features enabled. By implementing some advanced features—for
products can help protect against
                                           example, “block executable from being run from Temp folder”—more
ransomware, click here.
                                           malware can be detected and blocked.
                                           If possible, prevent the storage of sensitive data on local disks.
                                       ■


                                           Require users to store data on secure network drives. This will limit
                                           downtime because infected systems can simply be reimaged.
                                           Employ an antispam tool. Most ransomware campaigns start with a
                                       ■


                                           phishing email that contains a link or a certain type of attachment. In
                                           phishing campaigns that pack the ransomware in a .scr file or some
                                           other uncommon format, it is easy to set up a spam rule to block
                                           these attachments. If .zip files are allowed to pass, scan at least two
                                           levels into the .zip file for possible malicious content.
                                           Block unwanted or unneeded programs and traffic. If there is no need
                                       ■


                                           for Tor, block the application and its traffic on the network. Blocking
                                           Tor will often stop the ransomware from getting its public RSA key
                                           from the control server, thereby blocking the ransomware encryption
                                           process.
                                           Add network segmentation for critical devices.
                                       ■




                                           “Air gap” backups. Ensure backup systems, storage, and tapes are in a
                                       ■


                                           location not generally accessible by systems in production networks.
                                           If payloads from ransomware attacks spread laterally, they could
                                           potentially affect backed-up data.
                                           Leverage a virtual infrastructure for critical systems that are air
                                       ■


                                           gapped from the rest of the production network.
                                           Perform ongoing user-awareness education. Because most
                                       ■


                                           ransomware attacks begin with phishing emails, user awareness is
                                           critically important. For every 10 emails sent by attackers, statistics
                                           have shown that at least one will be successful. Do not open emails
                                           or attachments from unverified or unknown senders.

                                    To learn how Intel Security products can help protect against ransomware, click
                                    here.




Share this Report


                                                                        McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 32
                                                                                                               Key Topics




                                   “Trojanized” legitimate software is on the
                                   rise
                                   —Craig Schmugar

                                   Earlier this year, the Internet blew up over the topic of whether Apple should
                                   assist the FBI by providing access to a deceased terrorist’s iPhone. Tim Cook,
                                   Apple’s chief executive, referred to government’s demands as asking for the
                                   “equivalent of a master key, capable of opening hundreds of millions of locks.”
                                   In the end, the FBI gained access through undisclosed means and withdrew
                                   the request, but the notion of backdoor access is something that has been
                                   coveted by malware authors, spies, and nation-states for decades. Tactics for
                                   accomplishing this goal range from persuading victims via social engineering to
                                   hand over the keys to their devices, to intercepting hardware in the supply chain
                                   and inserting backdoors to surreptitiously gain remote access. However, the most
                                   common method is through the deployment of Trojan software.

                                   Most malicious applications today are rotten to the core. They serve one
                                   purpose, to profit bad actors, subjecting their victims to attacks. The tactical
We see a trend toward
                                   objectives of such crimes are generally to reach the target, establish a presence,
“Trojanizing” legitimate
                                   and persist for an extended time. To reach their targets, attackers either draw
applications, which are injected
                                   victims in through social engineering or intercept their everyday computer
with malicious nonreplicating
code.                              usage, most often through exploitation. In either case, the goal is for those
                                   unfortunate enough to cross paths with malicious code to be none the wiser.
                                   The longer attacks can go unnoticed, the larger the payout. To this end, attackers
                                   are growing more sophisticated as they endeavor to create long lasting, fully
                                   undetectable creations. The more authentic-looking a piece of code, the more
                                   likely it is to be overlooked. This is the primary driving factor in an increasing
                                   trend of “Trojanizing” legitimate applications, which are injected with malicious
                                   nonreplicating code.

                                   Attacker benefits
                                   The abuse of reputable applications affords attackers a number of benefits.
                                   Payloads are concealed behind a recognizable brand, contributing to the
                                   impression of legitimacy and helping ensure targeted users take the bait. This
                                   brand recognition continues after a system has been compromised, through
                                   recognizable directory, file, process, and registry key names and attributes. These
                                   elements can provide cover during security scans and forensics analysis, with
                                   recognizable properties blending with hundreds or even thousands of familiar
                                   programs.

                                   Another benefit is built-in persistence, or a method of restarting code that was
                                   previously terminated. Malware persistence falls into one of two categories: self-
                                   persistence, involving the installation of start-up hooks to endure reboots; and
                                   companion-persistence, which leverages existing start-up hooks to automatically
                                   load before, during, or after other wanted applications. Each system change
                                   made by malicious code is an indicator of compromise. Thus the fewer the
                                   number of changes, the smaller the detection surface. Trojanizing legitimate
                                   applications provides free persistence; the software’s natural method of start-up
                                   is all that is necessary for the malicious code to load. In fact, if the program is run
                                   manually on a regular basis, then persistence is self-perpetuated by the victims
                                   themselves.



Share this Report


                                                                      McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 33
                                                                                                   Key Topics



                    Methods of illegitimacy

                    The idea of riding on the coattails of popular applications harkens to the early
                    days of malware creation, arguably with the inception decades ago of the
                    very first parasitic file-infecting virus. Viruses differ from Trojans in that they
                    recursively self-replicate, meaning that they spread to other files, those files
                    in turn spread to other files, and so on. Part of the threat is the replication
                    logic, which decides the files to target and where to insert malicious routines.
                    Viruses can be analyzed and reverse engineered, and the replication logic and
                    markers provide an additional detection surface for antivirus software. Parasitic
                    Trojans, on the other hand, do not self-replicate, allowing for inserted code to
                    be streamlined toward the desired payload without the additional overhead and
                    corresponding detection surface. This can be an Achilles heel for defenses that
                    are ill equipped to cope with such attacks.


                      Binders/Joiners
                      Binder programs first appeared in the 1990s and give malware distributors
                      a quick and easy way to bundle their threats with other programs,
                      documents, and multimedia files. Decoupling the malicious code from
                      any social engineering aspects of an attack affords the perpetrators the
                      benefit of customizing each binary for a given campaign, without having to
                      code or recompile a threat. All that is required to build a new customized
                      threat is to select current malware and accompanying files. The binder will
                      combine all of them into a new executable ready for distribution. When a
                      victim runs the program, both the malware and combined file will be run.
                      Although binders do bundle clean and dirty files together, the result is a
                      new piece of malware, which does not closely resemble a legitimate file.




                      The Celesty File Binder remains one of the most common binder programs in use.




Share this Report


                                                        McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 34
                                                                                                                   Key Topics



                                        Hacking the Source
                                        While binding a clean application to a dirty one may provide some cover for
                                        those aiming to dupe users, poisoning the master source code does a far better
Binding a clean application to a
                                        job. With the ability to add or modify code and configurations, or build scripts,
dirty one may provide some cover
                                        attackers can impersonate software vendors and inherit the trust they have
for those aiming to dupe users, but
                                        with their customers. Download servers, code signing, and all of the tenants of
poisoning the master source code
does a far better job. And when         customer-facing authenticity are inherently present once the nefarious code has
redistributed libraries are involved,   been successfully planted. And when redistributed libraries are involved, this
this can result in other trusted        can result in other trusted software vendors perpetuating the erroneous trust.
software vendors perpetuating the
                                        Such was the case last year, when it was reported that the mobiSage software
erroneous trust.
                                        development kit contained a “backdoored” ad library that was subsequently
                                        consumed by thousands of iOS applications, including those distributed via the
                                        Apple App Store.

                                        However, penetrating the internal source control server or build system of an
                                        organization that produces widely distributed software is generally wrought with
                                        challenges. Although instances of this have been made public in the past and
                                        are likely to continue in the future, this route is definitely not the path of least
                                        resistance.

                                        Modifying a copy of the source code is much simpler to do, especially with
                                        interpreted, open source, or decompiled code. Adding or modifying routines here
The rapid growth of Android
                                        is straightforward for anyone comfortable coding in the relevant programming
malware can be attributed to the
                                        language.
modification of source code.

                                        This ease is a prime factor in the rapid growth of Android malware, for which
                                        the creation of copycat apps is a regular occurrence. Last year, Lookout reported
                                        Trojanized adware masquerading as 20,000 popular apps. Our data shows this
                                        number has ballooned to nearly 700,000 in less than a year.


                                                      Total malicious Shuanet, Kemoge, Shedun binaries

                                          1,800,000


                                          1,600,000


                                          1,400,000


                                          1,200,000


                                          1,000,000


                                           800,000


                                           600,000


                                           400,000


                                           200,000


                                                 0
                                                       Q1        Q2           Q3        Q4        Q1        Q2           Q3
                                                                      2015                                 2016

                                                                                                              Source: McAfee Labs.



Share this Report


                                                                             McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 35
                                                                                                                        Key Topics



                                 What about binaries for which the source is not available, or hackers unfamiliar
                                 with programming in the requisite language?

                                 Patchers
                                 Binary patching programs have emerged in the last couple of years to simplify
                                 the process of adding payloads to already compiled applications. Unlike
Binary patching programs have
                                 binders, patchers modify executables rather than create new ones. Payloads are
emerged in the last couple of
                                 strategically inserted with the goal of seamlessly maintaining application usage.
years to simplify the process
                                 These tools can be used in three scenarios: attacker/server side, client side, or
of adding malware payloads to
already compiled applications.   man in the middle.




                                 Attacker- or server-side patching. Tools run locally or remotely to statically patch binaries,
                                 which can be used to replace their desired counterparts.




                                 Client-side patching. Similarly, tools can run on the endpoint to patch local files.




Share this Report


                                                                          McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 36
                                                                                  Key Topics




Man-in-the-middle patching. A proxy server modifies binaries between the original source and
the final destination.



Regardless of the distribution approach, the binaries are modified to take the
place of desired or known applications. Binary patching is perhaps most heavily
used today in the realm of Android apps. Kits such as AndroRat and Dendroid
are responsible for tens of thousands of copycat apps concealing malicious
payloads.


                         Total AndroRat/Dendroid malware

     90,000


     80,000


     70,000


     60,000


     50,000


     40,000


     30,000


     20,000


     10,000


          0
                Q1          Q2           Q3         Q4           Q1        Q2           Q3
                                 2015                                     2016


Malicious Android binaries patched with popular backdoor kits.

                                                                             Source: McAfee Labs.




                                        McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 37
                                                                                                         Key Topics



                    BackDoor Factory (BDF) is a popular open-source executable binary patcher
                    that supports Windows, Mac, and Linux binary patching. Target programs are
                    modified to include predefined or user-specified shellcode. BDF allows the
                    operator to specify many options, including the host IP, port, and where to
                    insert the shellcode within the target. Code can be placed in the slack space of
                    a program and spread over one or more cavities, thus maintaining the original
                    file size and executable geometry. This tactic may render certain feature vectors
                    ineffective in machine learning algorithms applied to such threats.


                                                       Trojanized binaries

                          0.5%
                        0.7% 0.4%                                                        Apache HTTP server
                          1.0%
                                            12.3%
                        2.9%                                                             PuTTY

                                                                                         Microsoft Windows

                                                                                         Radmin Viewer
                                  15.8%
                                                                                         SSH Secure Shell Setup
                                                            66.4%
                                                                                         Process Explorer

                                                                                         Adobe Reader
                                                                                         and Acrobat Manager

                                                                                         Others



                    Distribution of 29,000 Trojanized Windows binaries discovered in the past two years.

                                                                                                   Source: McAfee Labs.




                    A BDF-patched PuTTY binary with payload split across multiple cavities.
Share this Report


                                                          McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 38
                                                                                               Key Topics




                    The Backdoor Factory Proxy (BDFProxy) takes BDF a step further by patching
                    executables on the fly as they are downloaded, leveraging a man-in-the-
                    middle attack posture. Joshua Pitts, the author of the BDF tools, discovered
                    this approach was actively being used in the wild in 2014 when applications
                    were downloaded via a Tor exit node in Russia. This discovery was made within
                    about an hour after the beginning of his search. In particular, all uncompressed
                    Windows executable files served over nonsecured HTTP connections were
                    modified to include the OnionDuke malware.


                    Who is at risk?

                    These attack scenarios apply to the majority of Internet users. Even those who
                    seldom install new applications are likely to have existing applications configured
                    for autoupdates. It is still commonplace for update servers to deliver binaries
                    over insecure HTTP connections. Connecting to open Wi-Fi hotspots provides
                    others an opportunity to carry out man-in-the-middle attacks. Running untrusted
                    programs remains a significant attack vector, and the ever-growing use of shared
                    libraries increases the overall risk, especially as it pertains to mobile devices and
                    the Internet of Things.


                    Recommended policies and procedures

                    A VPN should be used when connecting to an untrusted network. Administrators
                    should keep security software up to date and rely on strong indicators of trust
                    rather than those potentially forged in an attack. Applications should be signed
                    and verified with a chain of trust. Forensic analysis should include correlating
                    hashes with trusted sources.

                    Security software should include dynamic analysis to flag rogue actions
                    regardless of initial binary inspection because static scanning goes only so far.
                    Behavioral monitoring, web and IP reputation, memory scanning, and application
                    containment are welcome components in a complete solution.

                    Vendor downloads should occur over secure connections and all code should
                    be signed. This drastically reduces man-in-the-middle attacks. Software vendors
                    should include self-validation in their applications, regularly audit their code, use
                    static code analysis tools, and perform peer reviews.




Share this Report


                                                      McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 39
                                                                                                            Key Topics



                                    Summary

                                    The problem of Trojanized legitimate applications is likely to get worse before it
                                    gets better. Research and development advancements in penetration testing and
                                    vulnerability assessment make it easier to both discover vulnerable applications
                                    and systems, as well as exploit them. We have seen how such tools are combined
                                    and improved. Defenses must evolve similarly to overcome this increasing threat.

                                    To learn how Intel Security products can help protect against Trojanized
                                    legitimate software, click here.
To learn how Intel Security
products can help protect against
Trojanized legitimate software,
click here.




Share this Report


                                                                     McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 40
Threats Statistics
                     Malware
                     Web Threats




Share feedback
                                                                                       Threats Statistics




                             Malware

                                                       New Malware
                                                       New Malware

                              60,000,000

The growth of new unique
                              50,000,000
malware dropped 21% in Q3.

                              40,000,000


                              30,000,000


                              20,000,000


                              10,000,000


                                      0
                                            Q4    Q1   Q2          Q3   Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                           2014             2015                       2016


                                                                                     Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                                       Total Malware
                                                       Total Malware

                             700,000,000


                             600,000,000


                             500,000,000


                             400,000,000


                             300,000,000


                             200,000,000


                             100,000,000


                                      0
                                            Q4    Q1   Q2          Q3   Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                           2014             2015                       2016


                                                                                     Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




Share this Report


                                                        McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 42
                                                                                         Threats Statistics




                                                      New MobileMalware
                                                       New Mobile Malware

                              2,000,000

We cataloged more than two
                              1,750,000
million new mobile malware
threats in Q3.
                              1,500,000


                              1,250,000


                              1,000,000


                               750,000


                               500,000


                               250,000


                                     0
                                           Q4    Q1      Q2          Q3   Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                          2014                2015                       2016

                                                                                       Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                                      Total MobileMalware
                                                       Total Mobile Malware

                             13,500,000


                             12,000,000


                             10,500,000


                              9,000,000


                              7,500,000


                              6,000,000


                              4,500,000


                              3,000,000


                              1,500,000


                                     0
                                           Q4    Q1      Q2          Q3   Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                          2014                2015                       2016

                                                                                       Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.



Share this Report


                                                          McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 43
                                                                                                       Threats Statistics




                                      Regional Mobile MalwareInfection Rates in Q2 Q3 2016
                                        Regional Mobile Malware Infection Rates in 2016
                                            (percentage of mobile customers reporting infections)
                                           (percent of Mobile Customers Reporting Infections)

                                     12%

Infection rates in Africa and Asia
                                     10%
each dropped by 1.5%, while
Australia increased by 2% in Q3.
                                     8%


                                     6%


                                     4%


                                     2%


                                     0%
                                            Africa        Asia         Australia   Europe         North          South
                                                                                                 America        America

                                                                                                     Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                                Global Mobile Malware Infection Rates
                                           (percentage of mobile customers reporting infections)
                                                 Global Mobile Malware Infection Rates

                                     9%


                                     8%


                                     7%


                                     6%


                                     5%


                                     4%


                                     3%


                                     2%


                                     1%


                                       0
                                            Q4       Q1          Q2          Q3    Q4       Q1          Q2           Q3
                                           2014                       2015                             2016


                                                                                                     Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




Share this Report


                                                                  McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 44
                                                                                           Threats Statistics




                                                        New Mac OS Malware
                                                         New Mac OS Malware

                                   60,000

New Mac OS malware skyrocketed
                                   50,000
by 637% in Q3, but the increase
was due primarily to a single
                                   40,000
adware family, Bundlore.

                                   30,000


                                   20,000


                                   10,000


                                       0
                                             Q4    Q1      Q2          Q3   Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                            2014                2015                       2016


                                                                                         Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                                        Total Mac OS Malware
                                                         Total Mac OS Malware

                                  160,000


                                  140,000


                                  120,000


                                  100,000


                                   80,000


                                   60,000


                                   40,000


                                   20,000


                                       0
                                             Q4    Q1      Q2          Q3   Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                            2014                2015                       2016


                                                                                         Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




Share this Report


                                                            McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 45
                                                                                Threats Statistics




                                        New Malicious Signed Binaries
                                         New Malicious Signed Binaries

                     1,800,000


                     1,600,000


                     1,400,000


                     1,200,000


                     1,000,000


                      800,000


                      600,000


                      400,000


                      200,000


                            0
                                  Q4    Q1      Q2          Q3   Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                 2014                2015                       2016

                                                                              Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                        Total Malicious Signed Binaries
                                         Total Malicious Signed Binaries

                    22,500,000


                    20,000,000


                    17,500,000


                    15,000,000


                    12,500,000


                    10,000,000


                     7,500,000


                     5,000,000


                     2,500,000


                            0
                                  Q4    Q1      Q2          Q3   Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                 2014                2015                       2016


                                                                              Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.


Share this Report


                                                 McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 46
                                                                                           Threats Statistics




                                                        New MacroMalware
                                                         New Macro Malware

                                  200,000

New Microsoft Office (primarily
                                  180,000
Word) macro malware continued
the increase first seen in Q2.
                                  160,000


                                  140,000


                                  120,000


                                  100,000


                                   80,000


                                   60,000


                                   40,000


                                   20,000


                                       0
                                             Q4    Q1     Q2          Q3   Q4      Q1       Q2           Q3
                                            2014               2015                        2016

                                                                                         Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                                        Total MacroMalware
                                                         Total Macro Malware

                                  900,000


                                  800,000


                                  700,000


                                  600,000


                                  500,000


                                  400,000


                                  300,000


                                  200,000


                                  100,000


                                       0
                                             Q4    Q1     Q2          Q3   Q4      Q1       Q2           Q3
                                            2014               2015                        2016

                                                                                         Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.

Share this Report


                                                            McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 47
                                                                                   Threats Statistics




                    Web Threats

                                               New SuspectURLs
                                                New Suspect URLs

                    30,000,000


                    25,000,000


                    20,000,000


                    15,000,000


                    10,000,000


                     5,000,000


                            0
                                  Q4      Q1      Q2          Q3    Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                 2014                  2015                        2016


                                   URLs        Associated Domains


                                                                                 Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                               New Phishing URLs
                                                New Phishing URLs

                     1,400,000


                     1,200,000


                     1,000,000


                      800,000


                      600,000


                      400,000


                      200,000


                            0
                                  Q4      Q1      Q2          Q3    Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                 2014                  2015                        2016


                                   URLs        Associated Domains


                                                                                 Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




Share this Report


                                                    McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 48
                                                                                   Threats Statistics




                                                 New Spam URLs
                                                 New Spam URLs

                    2,500,000


                    2,000,000


                    1,500,000


                    1,000,000


                     500,000


                           0
                                 Q4       Q1      Q2          Q3    Q4     Q1      Q2            Q3
                                2014                   2015                       2016


                                  URLs         Associated Domains


                                                                                 Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                         Global Spam and Email Volume
                                               (trillions of messages)
                                          Global Spam and Email Volume

                           7


                           6


                           5


                           4


                           3


                           2


                           1


                           0
                                 Q4       Q1      Q2          Q3    Q4     Q1       Q2           Q3
                                2014                   2015                        2016


                                  Spam         Legitimate Email


                                                                                 Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




Share this Report


                                                    McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 49
                                                                                                                      Threats Statistics




                                                            Spam Emails From Top 10 Botnets
                                                                 Spam Emails Frommessages)
                                                                       (millions of Top 10 Botnets

                                            300

The Necurs botnet multiplied its
                                            250
Q2 volume by nearly seven times,
becoming highest-volume spam
                                            200
botnet of Q3. We also measured
a sharp drop in spamming by
Kelihos, which resulted in the first        150
decline in quarterly volume we
have observed in 2016.                      100


                                             50


                                              0
                                                    Q4            Q1         Q2          Q3        Q4       Q1         Q2           Q3
                                                   2014                           2015                                2016



                                                                         Others                Lethic
                                                       Sendsafe                                                  Necurs

                                                                         Cutwail               Darkmailer
                                                       Spamsalot

                                                       Kelihos                                 Gamut
                                                                         KelihosC


                                                                                                                    Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                                                         Worldwide Botnet Prevalence
                                                                  Worldwide Botnet Prevalence


                                                                                                                          Wapomi
Wapomi, which delivers worms
and downloaders, remained                                                                                                 CryptXXX
number one in Q3, declining from
                                                            16%
                                       3%
45% in Q2. CryptXXX ransomware
                                                                                                                          China Chopper Webshell
served by botnet jumped into
                                                                                         33%
second place; it was responsible
                                                                                                                          Sality
for only 2% of traffic last quarter.              5%
                                                                                                                          Ramnit
                                                  5%
                                                                                                                          OnionDuke
                                                   6%
                                                                                                                          Muieblackcat
                                                         7%                          13%
                                                                       12%
                                                                                                                          PlugX

                                                                                                                          Others

                                                                                                                    Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




Share this Report


                                                                              McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 50
                                                                                               Threats Statistics




                                                    Top Countries Hosting Botnet Control Servers
                                             Top Countries Hosting Botnet Control Servers

                                                                                                    United States

                                                                                                    Germany

                                                                                                    Russia

                                                  26%                                               Netherlands

                                                                          39%                       United Kingdom

                                                                                                    China
                                   2%
                                   2%                                                               France
                                   2%
                                                                                                    South Korea
                                    3%              4%               9%
                                                         5% 5%                                      Canada
                                        3%

                                                                                                    Australia

                                                                                                    Others

                                                                                             Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




                                                                    Top Network Attacks
                                                           Top Network Attacks

                                                      2%
                                                 2%
The methods of top network
                                                                                                    Denial of Service
                                                           4%
attacks are relatively unchanged
from last quarter.
                                                    4%
                                                                                                    Browser
                                                5%
                                                                                                    Brute Force
                                                                          35%
                                                                                                    SSL
                                              18%
                                                                                                    DNS

                                                                                                    Scan

                                                            30%
                                                                                                    Web

                                                                                                    Others

                                                                                             Source: McAfee Labs, 2016.




Share this Report


                                                                McAfee Labs Threats Report, December 2016 | 51
                                      About Intel Security
                                      McAfee is now part of Intel Security. With its Security Connected strategy,
                                      innovative approach to hardware-enhanced security, and unique Global
                                      Threat Intelligence, Intel Security is intensely focused on developing proactive,
Feedback. To help guide our
                                      proven security solutions and services that protect systems, networks, and
future work, we’re interested in
                                      mobile devices for business and personal use around the world. Intel Security
your feedback. If you would like to
share your views, please click here   combines the experience and expertise of McAfee with the innovation and
to complete a quick, five-minute      proven performance of Intel to make security an essential ingredient in every
Threats Report survey.                architecture and on every computing platform. Intel Security’s mission is to give
                                      everyone the confidence to live and work safely and securely in the digital world.

                                      www.intelsecurity.com
Follow McAfee Labs




                                      The information in this document is provided only for educational purposes and for the convenience of Intel Security
                                      customers. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice, and is provided “as is,” without
                                      guarantee or warranty as to the accuracy or applicability of the information to any specific situation or circumstance.
McAfee. Part of Intel Security.
                                      Intel and the Intel and McAfee logos are trademarks of Intel Corporation or McAfee, Inc. in the US and/or other
2821 Mission College Boulevard
                                      countries. Other marks and brands may be claimed as the property of others. Copyright © 2016 Intel Corporation.
Santa Clara, CA 95054
                                      1942_1016_rp-qtrly-threats-report-dec-2016_PAIR
888 847 8766
                                      DECEMBER 2016
www.intelsecurity.com
